"Using the ide" Page [Part 1] (#111)
FabricMC/fabric-docs: develop/getting-started/using-the-ide.md

---

> title: Using the IDE to the fullest

Reviewer: Maybe "IDE Tips and Tricks" instead?

---
title: IDE Tips and Tricks
description: Useful information to handle and traverse your Project using the IDE efficiently.
authors: 
    - JR1811
---

# IDE Tips and Tricks

This page gives useful bits of information, to speed up and ease the workflow of developers. Incorporate them into yours, to your liking.
It may take some time to learn and get used to the shortcuts and other options. You can use this page as a reference for that.

> > [!NOTE]

Reviewer: Migrate this to new callout syntax.

> Key binds in the text are listed as Windows shortcuts.
> Refer to the `File > Setings > Keymap` Settings or search for the functionality elsewhere if you are using a different Keyboard layout.

## Traversing projects

### Manually

IntelliJ has many different ways of traversing projects. If you have generated sources using the `./gradlew genSources` commands in the terminal or used the `Tasks > fabric > genSources` Gradle Tasks in the Gradle Window, you can manually go through the source files of Minecraft in the
Project Window's External Libraries.

![Gradle Task](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/traversing_01.png)

::: details Recommendation

> A recommendation would be to aim for a Java decompiler, which is as accurate as possible. For example, the [VineFlower](https://github.com/Vineflower/vineflower) option allows for a good experience when debugging the source code of Minecraft.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A recommendation would be to use a highly accurate Java decompiler. The VineFlower option, for example, offers a good experience when debugging the source code of Minecraft. More information can be found [here](https://github.com/Vineflower/vineflower).
```

You should probably note that Vineflower is the default compiler in Loom 1.7, this details block probably isnt needed.

Author: yeah, I've written that right before the update notes came xD
ill get rid of that part.

If you have issues with one of the options, you can always switch later on too, simply by running their Gradle Tasks.
:::

> The Minecraft Source code can be found if you look for `net.minecraft` in the Project Window's External Libraries. If you use the "Split client and common sources" option from the online [Template mod generator](https://fabricmc.net/develop/template/), there will be two sources, as the name suggests. But also other sources of projects, libraries and dependencies, which are imported using the `build.gradle` file

Reviewer: Maybe something like:

The Minecraft source code can be found by looking for \`net.minecraft\` in the Project Window's External Libraries. If your project uses split sources from the online \[Template mod generator](https://fabricmc.net/develop/template/), there will be two sources as indicated by the name (client/common). Additionally, other sources of projects, libraries, and dependencies imported via the \`build.gradle\` file will also be available.

I just found this a bit confusing to read.

are located in there. This method is often used when browsing for assets, tags and other files.

![External Library](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/traversing_02_1.png)

![Split sources](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/traversing_02_2.png)

### Search

> Pressing `Shift` twice opens up a Search window. In there you can search for your project's files and classes. When Activating the checkbox `include non-project items`

Reviewer: You should put a notice at the top of the page about keybinds being the default keymap, some people switch their IntelliJ IDEA keymaps when they first install it without batting a thought.

Also, it is probably worth using the `<kbd>` tag here for keybinds instead of inline codeblocks?

Author: Well, not all of them are the default ones. E.g. in the comments section, it's explained how to set up custom key binds for that. But yeah, a note for that should be good tho.

| `CTRL + SHIFT + F` | Find in a bigger scope (can set specific file type mask)    |
| `CTRL + SHIFT + R` | Replace in a bigger scope (can set specific file type mask) |

If enabled, all of those tools allow for a more specific pattern matching using "[Regex](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression)".

![Regex replace](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/search_and_replace_01.png)

## Comments

Good code should be easily readable and [self-documenting](https://bytedev.medium.com/code-comment-anti-patterns-and-why-the-comment-you-just-wrote-is-probably-not-needed-919a92cf6758). Picking expressive names for variables, classes and methods can help a lot, but sometimes
comments are necessary to leave notes or **temporarily** disable code for testing.

### Prepare Shortcuts

To comment out code faster, open IntelliJ's Settings, look for the `Comment with Line Comment`
and the `Comment with Block Comment` entries, and set their Key binds to your preferences.

![Keymap settings](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/comments_01.png)

Now you can highlight the necessary code and use the shortcuts, to comment the section out.

> ```java

Reviewer: What is the purpose of these code blocks, im not sure that they're really needed?

Author: They show how (multiline) comments look like and how to use them.
Lmk if i should remove them.

Reviewer: Yeah I dont think you need a codeblock to emphasise this, most people know what a comment is :stuck_out_tongue_winking_eye:

// private static final int PROTECTION_BOOTS = 2;
private static final int PROTECTION_LEGGINGS = 5;
// private static final int PROTECTION_CHESTPLATE = 6;
private static final int PROTECTION_HELMET = 1;
```

```java
/*
ModItems.initialize();
ModSounds.initializeSounds();
ModParticles.initialize();
*/

private static int secondsToTicks(float seconds) {
    return (int) (seconds * 20 /*+ 69*/);
}
```

### Region comments

In IntelliJ, right next to the line numbers, you can have small [+] and [-] icons. Those can be used to temporarily collapse methods, if-statements, classes and many other things
if you are not actively working on them. To create a custom block which can be collapsed, use the `region` and `endregion` comments.

```java
// region collapse block name
    ModBlocks.initialize();
    ModBlockEntities.registerBlockEntityTypes();
    ModItems.initialize();
    ModSounds.initializeSounds();
    ModParticles.initialize();
// endregion
```

![Region collapse](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/comments_02.png)

> > [!WARNING]

Reviewer: Update this to the new callout syntax please.

```
::: warning
...
:::
```

Reviewer: Also, this block isnt really needed, all pages on this site use IDEA.

> This feature may not be supported in other editors and IDEs.
> If you notice that you are using too many of them, consider refactoring your code to make it more readable!

### TODO and FIXME notes

When working on code, it can come in handy to leave notes, on what still needs to be taken care of. Sometimes you may also spot
a potential issue in the code, but you don't want to stop focusing on the current problem. In this case, use the
`TODO` or `FIXME` comments.

![TODO and FIXME comments](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/comments_03.png)

IntelliJ will keep track of them in the `TODO` window and may notify you, if you commit code,
which uses those type of comments.

![TODO and FIXME comments](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/comments_04.png)

![Commit with TODO](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/comments_05.png)

> [!WARNING]

> > This feature may not be supported in other editors and IDEs.

Reviewer: Same here, not needed, all pages are for IDEA

### Javadocs

A great way of documenting your code is the usage of JavaDoc. JavaDocs not only provide useful information for implementation of methods and classes, but are also
deeply integrated into IntelliJ.

When hovering over method or class names, which have JavaDoc comments added to them, they will display this information in their information window.

![JavaDoc](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/comments_06.png)

To get started, simply write `/**` above the method or class definition and press enter. IntelliJ will automatically generate lines for the return value
and the parameters but you can change them however you want. There are many custom functionalities available and you can also use HTML if needed.

> Minecraft's `ScreenHandler` class has some examples. To toggle the render view, use the pen button near the line numbers.

Reviewer: Should note that any comments within minecraft's source code are from mappings, such as yarn.

![JavaDoc editing](/assets/develop/getting-started/using-the-ide/comments_07.png)

## Optimizing IntelliJ further

There are many more shortcuts and handy little tricks which would go above the scope of this page.
Jetbrains has many good talks, videos and documentation pages about how to further customize your workspace.

### PostFix completion

> [JetBrains Pagse on Postfix code completion](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/auto-completing-code.html#postfix_completion) to alter code after writing it quickly. Often used examples contain `.not` `.if` `.var` `.null` and `.for`. [Here](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/fleet/postfix-templates-list-java.html) is also a list of all predefined Java Postfix code completions but you can also [create your own](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/auto-completing-code.html#custom-postfix-templates).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[JetBrains Pagse on Postfix code completion](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/auto-completing-code.html#postfix_completion) to alter code after writing it quickly. Often used examples contain `.not`, `.if`, `.var`, `.null` and `.for`. [Here](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/fleet/postfix-templates-list-java.html) is also a list of all predefined Java Postfix code completions but you can also [create your own](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/auto-completing-code.html#custom-postfix-templates).
```

`.new` is also a commonly used one as well, maybe worth mentioning.

### Live Templates

> [Youtube IntelliJ IDEA Pro Tips: Live Templates](https://youtu.be/XhCNoN40QTU?si=dGYFr2hY7lPJ6Wge) to generate your custom boilerplate code faster.

Reviewer: After #116 we can migrate these videos into actual videoplayers using vidstack.
